Now let's see how we can connect Flutter to Firebase.
And for that, here's one important note.
Of course, we already used Flutter in conjunction with Firebase before, and we didn't have to go through
all the setup steps I just showed you.
This was possible because we only talked to Firebase in those earlier sections by using Firebase Rest
APIs.
So they're web APIs which are exposed by Firebase to which we could communicate through flutters HTTP
package.
And this is a fine way of communicating with Firebase and with any backend, but Firebase is such a
powerful service that you can't use all its services efficiently through just their web APIs.
Instead, they give you sticks, which are packages you can add to your project.
So to your flutter project, I mean, so that you can execute flutter code.
And behind the scenes, this communication with the Firebase backend will happen so that you don't have
to write and handle all those outgoing HTTP requests on your own.
That's the difference.
That's what we're going to do here, and that's why we needed this different setup now, because we're
going to use some packages which are provided by the Firebase team for Flutter apps that make our life
easier.
If we want to dive really deep into the Firebase ecosystem and if we want to use a lot of their services
for the dummy back and part we had earlier for working with any rest APIs or any other Web APIs, you
don't need such a setup and you don't need dedicated sticks.
We use that here because we're going to go all in on Firebase in this module and we need access to all
their features and we want that access through a convenient flutter package which exposes us some methods
we can call, which exposes us a night code base we can use, where we don't have to wire up everything
on our own and where we don't have to take care about all the nitty gritty details on our own.
That's the difference.
So to install those packages I'm talking about, you can Google for Flutter Firebase and you'll find
an article in the official Firebase Docs.
Now here you also can learn how to set everything up.
We already did that.
And you see some examples.
Now, if you go back, you will also see that on Flutter Dev.
You'll also find some Firebase documentation.
So on the official Flutter page, on the official Flutter docs, you find some Firebase documentation.
Now, if we go back again and we manipulate our search query a little bit and you search for Flutter
Firebase Fire Store, we'll find the first SDK which will install to get started with Firebase.
This SDK here Cloud Fire Store allows us to communicate with one Firebase feature, which is called
Fire Store, which is their database.
Now there are other features as well, and if we want to work with those, we have to add different
flutter packages.
But we're going to get started with this one.
Now, here you see some setup steps and these are mainly the steps we already followed.
So there's not much for us to do here.
Instead, we can go right away to installing and just grab this link here and added an AR pop spec dot
YAML file here, maybe below the Cupertino icons.
And if you didn't save the file, this package should be automatically installed.
If not, you can manually run flutter packages, get this installs, this flutter package into your
project and now you can import it and use it in your code.
Now to get started, let's go back to our Firebase console and there click on database.
Here, you'll find two databases.
Cloud Fires Store and also the real time database.
And earlier in the course, we use the real time database because that was the one that was easier to
use as a dummy backend that gave us a nice rest API which we could use.
Now we're going to use Cloud Fire Store, which is the more modern solution by Firebase, which does
not give us such a nice rest API, but which doesn't matter here because we're going to communicate
with it through the Flutter Firebase SDK anyways.
So you can click on create database and make sure you start in test mode here.
That's important so that we can access this database without limitations.
Click on next.
And choose any location you want here.
That's in the end the server that is going to be used, you can leave the default here and click on
Done.
Now this will set up this database and this is a database which will run in the cloud.
And Firebase then has a layer between the database and between your app, which in the end is bridged
by that Flutter Firebase SDK through which we can communicate to that database from within our Flutter
app.
Now with that fire store created here, with that database created here.
Let's go back to our chat screen where we have our list view here.
And let's, for example, pull in some data that resides in this database.
For that, we can create a collection here, which is basically a table in your database.
You could say, and I'm going to name my collection here chats.
Click on next.
And you can now also add a document here.
A document is basically an entry in that table, and you're going to fetch documents and you're going
to be able to write documents with help of the Flutter Firebase SDK.
So a collection will basically be where you later store your data.
And a document is one piece of data.
So not a document in the sense of a word document where you write text, but a document instead is just
a piece of data.
For example, if you would be building an online shop, you could have a collection which is named products.
And in there you have a list of products where every single product is a document in the product collection,
or you have a collection named users with a bunch of user documents in there.
And in Firebase, every document can also have sub collections.
So you could have a chat collection with a bunch of chat room documents, and every chatroom document
could then have a messages collection which contains individual message documents.
That's how far store is structured, but we'll see that in action throughout this module.
Now I'm going to generate an ID automatically here.
And I'm not going to add any field here.
I'll just save it like this instead.
And now here we got this chess collection with this one chess document we created.
And in there we can create a new collection.
And you always have this pattern in Firebase Collection Document Collection document.
So our collection always has documents and a document may have other collections.
It may also have other fields, like, for example, some text you want to store it there, some numbers,
whatever.
Here in my chat's collection, I have one document and in that chat document I'm going to create a new
collection, which I'll name messages, click next and create an ID automatically.
And now I'm going to add a field here, which I'll name text.
The type is string, which means it's well, some text and then the value here could just be Hi there
like this, and if I now save this, this is stored.
And now in the end I have a chat collection with one document which has a messages collection which
then has my messages where I have one document which has a text of Hi there.
And we can now utilize this here in our chat screen widget.
Let's say, besides our body.
We add a floating action button here.
So our regular floating action button.
Where the child is simply.
An icon.
Let's say the add item for now.
And we're on pressed.
We want to execute some function.
Now the function I want to execute here is a function that should reach out to Firebase and for the
moment not add anything.
We'll add this later, but instead fetch the data from there so that we can see how we can communicate
with Firebase.
Eventually we'll output all the data here, but for the moment, let's just output the data we fetch
in the console with a print statement.
For that, we need to fetch it first, though, and we can do this with fire store.
We installed this fire store package to cloud fire store package.
So now in shared screen where I want to use it, I can import package.
Cloud Fire store slash.
Cloud fire store dart.
And with this import added here in on pressed you can access via store.
Dot instance, there always is one active instance which is managed on your behalf and on that instance
you can execute methods.
You can, for example, use collection to reach out to a collection.
Now here you then specify the name of the collection, or you specify a full path to a specific sub
collection.
For example, here I want to get my chats and there is one chat which I created.
It has this ID which was generated automatically.
Let's quickly grab this ID here and add it here and add another slash and then reach out to messages.
So with this, we're telling our story that we want to get access to the messages collection inside
of this document instead of the chats collection.
Now with this access to a collection, we can do more things.
We can, for example, add a new document with this ADD method.
We can get a specific document here with the document method.
So get the data for a specific document.
We can also query and search for documents that meet a certain condition, for example.
And we also have snapshots here.
And snapshots is an amazing method which we can call on a collection.
Snapshots returns a stream.
Now, since it is a stream that means it's going to emit new values whenever data changes.
So that's the real time data aspect I mentioned earlier.
It allows us to set up a listener through the Firebase Flutter SDK to our Firebase database, and whenever
data changes in there, this listener will be notified automatically and we can re render our widget
or do whatever we want to do.
So here for the moment, I will just call, listen to set up a listener and pass in a function that
will trigger for every piece of data we get.
And I'll just print that data here inside of that function I passed to listen.
Now this is just some dummy code will replace it later, but for the moment it's good like this.
Now let's save this and let's restart this application.
Here is our app and now click the plus button.
If you click it, you will see an error.
Now this can happen if you add it all your Firebase configuration and you didn't restart your app fully
in between.
So I'll actually close this running application and do a full restart and therefore rebuild.
This makes sure that all those configuration settings and files which we added will be taken into account.
So let's wait for it as full restart to finish.
And you might now be getting a different era.
You might also not be getting this.
This really depends a bit on the point of time you are viewing this and the cloud store flutter package
we're using.
At the moment you might get such an error that points at DECS Archive Merger exception.
Now this is simply a bug with the package, which is easy to fix.
You can go to your android folder and then the build gradle file in the app folder.
And they are in default config at the end.
Add multi decks enabled.
True.
Written like this.
Make sure the D and the E here is a capital case d and E.
Also then scroll down and go to dependencies and here add implementation and then single quotes come
dot android dot support colon multi dex.
Colon 1.0.3.
Now, if you do all of that, if you add these two things and you restart your application, it should
now rebuild successfully and should restart successfully.
So let's wait for that to finish.
And that looks better.
Here's the running application and now click the plus button once.
If you do so, you should now see instance of query, snapshot or something similar here in the console.
And that's coming from this print statement here.
Indeed, on data, you can access different kinds of data.
For example, you can access a documents key.
And if you do that and you save and you click the plus button again, you see an instance of document
snapshot like this in an array, and you can access the first document here because this is an array.
With the square bracket notation and zero, which is the index of the first element.
And then there add one extra pair of square brackets and x is text like this text because that's the.
Key.
I chose here in Massachusetts to store the text for a single message.
If you chose a different key here, you need to access a different key here.
So that's essentially just getting access to that one document we have right now in the messages collection
and then retrieving the text field and the value stored in that field from there.
And if you save that now and you click the plus again, you will see, hi there, here.
So that shows us that it works and that we have access to this database.
Now we can also access data documents.
And call for each on that to execute a function on every document.
And that function will get the document as a input.
And we can then do something with the document in here.
For example, print the document text as we did before.
The difference is that we now do this for every document we have in messages.
Now, at the moment, this still gives us just hi there.
But now the nice thing is if we go back to Firebase and here in Messages, we add a new document.
So not a new field here, but a new document in messages.
And we give this an ID automatically and we add a text field here as well.
And we add this is another entry and I save this.
You will see it was added here, but without me doing anything here, without me restarting or clicking
the plus again.
So without any of that, you also see this is another entry here in the lock because this is a stream
and therefore such a life listener to our collection.
Now, this is, of course, not the final way of how we want to listen, but this is a nice start.